[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>CHARA CARUTHERS:
So we have made it
to the last episode
of this lovely series.
And in this one, we are
going to be talking about one
of the most important healing
principles of Ayurveda.
But first, a little background.
So according to Ayurveda,
we are digesting machines.
Everything that we come into
contact with-- think about it,
all the food and the ideas,
the thoughts, the information--
our mind-body complex has
to digest all of this.
It has to process
and assimilate it
in order to extract
the goodness,
in order to extract what's
going to nourish and support us.
And so when you think
about everything
that you come into contact
with every single day,
you realize this is a really
big job for the mind and body
to do.
And so what typically
happens is the fact
that we take in so
much information really
puts a burden on our
mind-body digestive system.
It makes it difficult for us
to process all the ideas or all
the information.
It makes it difficult
for our bodies
to really process all the
food that we're taking in.
And that impacts how
we actually feel.
And it shows up as symptoms,
like sluggishness or lethargy,
foggy brain,
headaches, insomnia,
and a whole host of other
issues that have become
pretty common for a lot of us.
And so the Ayurvedic approach
to re-establishing our natural
harmony is simple--
eliminate the bad stuff.
So those are the
things that make
you feel heavy or blocked or
weak, less connected and less
motivated and really just
less than who you really are.
And we want to add or
maintain the good stuff.
So those are the
things that are going
to make you feel light and
strong, aware, connected,
and clear.
And so these two things,
in the simplest terms,
are the way that we
describe cleansing, right?
Eliminate the bad stuff
and maintain or add
some of the good stuff.
And so Ayurvedic
cleansing is a process
of carving out time
to connect deeply
with your own inner knowing.
That means creating some space
to listen to that voice that
understands better than
your friends or your family
or even your society
what you need to do
and who you need to
be in order to live
in the most powerful and
healthy way possible.
It's also a process of easing
the burden on the mind, right?
Letting go of
self-limiting thoughts
or letting go of all of
the information and things
that you really don't need,
that aren't really serving you.
And then lastly, it's a
process of easing the burden
on the body--
so giving your body a
little bit of space,
a little bit of time to do
the work that it's actually
meant to do, easing that burden,
so that your digestive system,
mind-body digestive systems,
can build themselves,
become stronger.
And so Ayurvedic cleansing
is about nourishing
the mind and body in a way
that does not overburden it.
It's not about
starving yourself.
It's about feeding
ourselves with love.
And to do that, we take
in foods that are light,
that are simple, that
are easy to digest,
and that are tasty as well.
And so today, I want to
introduce you to kitchari.
So kitchari's a really
simple dish, easy to make,
and it's sometimes considered
Ayurvedic chicken soup.
It's a dish that is
incredibly nourishing
and that we typically
eat when we're cleansing.
So if you are
cleansing, you might
have maybe one or two
meals a day of kitchari,
and perhaps nothing else,
for as short a time as a day
and perhaps for as long a time
as maybe a week to 10 days,
or possibly even
a couple of weeks.
And so let's talk a little bit
about what kitchari actually
is.
So quite simply, kitchari is a
mix of a couple of ingredients.
Primarily, it's
a split mung dal.
And mung dal is a very
interesting legume.
I've mentioned prior
legumes and beans have
a drying and a cooling quality.
Well, mung dal has that,
but it's also tridoshic.
So it tends to balance
all of the doshas.
And this one's a split.
So the holes have been removed.
And it's been split in two.
And that's the yellow one.
Sometimes you'll see mung dal
as the green, the whole beans.
But this is the same bean,
but in a different form.
And then the other ingredient,
typical ingredient in kitchari
is rice.
We like to go with a
nice long grain rice.
And so, typically, we'll
use a basmati rice, in part
because it's quite
easy to digest,
and it's fast and easy to cook.
And so we combine these
two things, these two
lovely ingredients,
which together
create a complete
protein for the body.
There's the nourishment.
We also add some gorgeous
spices that actually
help to fire up your digestion.
And I also will
typically, when cleansing,
add some vegetables as well,
just up the nutrient factor.
And so the beauty of kitchari,
besides how great it tastes,
is that it's a dish that you
can make in just a single pot.
And so we've got
everything here.
You can add some of your
favorite vegetables.
We've got all the spices, the
rice, the beans, all of that.
And all you need to
do is serve and enjoy.
The other great
thing about kitchari
is that you can change
the texture of it.
I've seen it everything
from nice and soupy
to a little drier.
And so you can add
to reduce water
to suit your own
personal taste in terms
of whether you like
things a little bit dryer
or whether you prefer
to have something
that's a little bit more
soothing and a little more
souplike.
I can tell you, this one
is a family favorite.
And it's one of my
favorites as well.
And it's nice to know that
you're being good to your body
while you're also
eating something
that is incredibly delicious
and warming and nourishing.
So there you are-- the kitchari.
[MUSIC PLAYING]